# GA4GH Discovery Search API

A standard for a global federated data sharing network that allows the querying, and subsequent -optional- processing of the results on a cloud environment.

Please note this standard is work in progress.

# Preface

The Matchmaker Exchange (MME) API defined a JSON Structure representing a patient, which was used to perform a "query by example" as a federated request across a network of servers (or nodes). 

While the MME network was designed to allow for easy federated case matching, due to the complexity of the problem, it is limited by design to allow each server to determine what best constitutes a match. This functionality is useful for databases of siloed cases, but it doesn't allow for broader, specifically targeted searching of cases, which can fulfil many more clinical and scientific use cases.

A new standard for case discovery, the Search API. A robust and flexible approach, considering databases which contain many types of case associated data, without sacrificing the huge power of unilateral federated searching underpinned by an interoperable format for query and response.

# Concept

We define the two actors involved as the `server` and the `client`, following HTTP semantics.

A server is a database or system which contains any number of cases and associated case data, which it is willing to perform searches on, and return data on.

A client is a system which makes search requests to a server (or many servers in a federated request) on behalf of a user and displays any results to the user, or based on instructions as part of a workflow (like a pipeline).

Unlike the MME API, there's no requirement for a client to make requests to a server on the basis of an existing patient record, allowing a user to construct any query they wish.

## Expected process

1. The client poses a question regarding a patient to the server. We define this as the `query`

    The query contains a collection of components which define specific aspects of the query. They query may also optionally specify that it requires specific types of data in the response for the response to be useful.

2. The server uses the query components provided to perform a search on its data

3. The server returns as much or as little of the data or metadata as it is able.
    
    The response may include as little as an assertion that some records exist for the query criteria, much in the same way Beacon works, or it may provide rich and full variant and phenotypic data for each case that fulfils the query criteria.

## Request and Response overview

The request a client makes to a server is over an HTTP POST, where the query is define in a JSON payload.

The main elements of the JSON query payload are `components`, `operators`, and `meta`.

The main elements of the JSON response payload are `records` and `meta`. An array of `records` will each contain any number of `components` which represent case data.

In both cases, the `meta` object is related to the query and response itself, and not any of the query or subject data.

The `components` that can be used in the query and response differ, although some are useable in both.

The `operators` may be used to define a single operator for all components (`AND` / `OR`), or define a more complex boolean logic query using components.

More details for the Request and the Response structure and meaning are provided on the respective pages.

JSON Schemas will be provided as a normative reference for the request and response.
OpenAPI specifications will be provided, but may be omitted for the initial release.

# Security

This specification is expected to support:

- Open data sources that do not require authentication
- Protected data sources that do require authentication

In the situation where a host requires authentication for access, the client should provide an authentication token located in a header field `X-Auth-Token`.

The authentication token may be a predefined token generated by the server specifically for the client, which they must exchange via a secure method such as GPG encryption using public and private keys.

The authentication token may be an O-Auth 2.0 barer access token provided in response to an O-Auth exchange, although how to achieve this is not specified. O-Auth 2.0 is recomended by GA4GH for authentication and authorisation purposes.

# API Version

The API version will follow the rules set out by [Semantic Versioning 2.0.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

    Given a version number MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, increment the:

    MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes,
    MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards-compatible manner, and
    PATCH version when you make backwards-compatible bug fixes.

    Additional labels for pre-release and build metadata are available as extensions to the MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format.

The MAJOR version MUST be included in the URL exposed by servers for the API, in the format of `vX`, where `X` is a major version. 

The version of the API is linked to the request and response structure, and not any individual components used with the request and response, which have their own associated semantic version number.

An example API URL: `https://yournode.org/v1/search`

## Expectations

A request may specify which API version response they require (if any) in the format of an [X-Range](https://docs.npmjs.com/misc/semver#x-ranges-12x-1x-12-) string (The Major version MUST match) using the `Expect` header of the request. The server must either respond with a backwards compatible version of the response, or respond with HTTP Status Code `417 Expectation Failed`.

If a request does not specify a required response version, the responding server must respond with the latest version they support of the major version defined in the API URL.

Note: Patch versions are backwards and forwards compatible, while Minor versions are only backwards compatible.

# Content type

The Content Type for a Request must be `application/json`.

The Content Type for a Response should be `application/json`, although it should be expected that in  the case of errors, the server may be prevented from returning JSON content.

The HTTP status code should be checked before attempting to process content. Severs may include error information in a JSON payload with a non `200` HTTP status code, but the structure of this is not defined.

## Content

The HTTP POST request body and the response body should both be JSON.
See the following documents for details on the format.

* [The structure of the `search`](search_structure/README.md)
* [The structure of the `result`](result_structure/README.md)

# Reserved keys and extensions

The API reserves for its use, JSON object keys which begin with an underscore "\_" or a dash "-".

The API defined structure allows for clients or servers to define their own proprietary extensions as they see fit, by prefixing JSON object keys with an underscore "\_".

A server may wish to reveal additional information about a record or summary information about the collection of records which are not defined by a component. A new component proprietary component can be included by prefixing the given component name with an underscore: `_mySpecialComponent`.

A client and a server may have a special relationship where they want to allow additional information to be searched on, which doesn't require any authentication. The maintainers of the client and the server may agree on new components, but must prefix the component names with underscores.

It is not necessary to also prefix all the fields of a proprietary component with an underscore, as it must be assumed that any JSON data that is a descendant of a key which is prefixed with an underscore is also nonstandard.

It is recommended a JSON Schema be supplied for a proprietary component to formally define the expectations, which may later be added to a repository of official GA4GH components, should the component be seen as useful by the community.

## Example usage

These example constructs are based on use-cases from the driver projects and their feedback: [examples](example_usage/README.md)


# Acknowledgments

This generalized standard was inspired, adapted, and built up from existing work by:

* Global Alliance for Genomics and Health Discovery Search API [team](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lzN_pu8tATZXUvDtFKSG7IevE5TWLfFz0tdKfgtUSzU)
* Requirements, design, brainstorming, and ideas gathered from the GA4GH driver project community, [summerized](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jPPVhSvmzW5kK_rKTxkjPvxlcGicHhHPgO4cqqP3CBU/edit?ts=5a84936c#heading=h.4lfahcth694x).
* Orion Buske (@buske) and Ben Hutton (@relequestual) - [MME V2 Proposal](https://github.com/ga4gh/mme-apis/blob/version2-mock/version2/overview.md)
* Ben Hutton's (@relequestual) GA4GH Search API component based architecture [proposal](https://gist.github.com/Relequestual/65c0446944519a66f8562d02b3cb4c86)
* GePh-Query API ("Jeff") by Anthony J. Brookes and his team at the [Cafe Variome](https://www.cafevariome.org) discovery platform
* The merging of concepts, content, and building of first draft by Harindra Arachchi @harindra-a
* The Matchmaker Exchange APIs [@github](https://github.com/ga4gh/mme-apis/blob/master/search-api.md)

Also thanks to all [contributors](https://github.com/ga4gh-discovery/ga4gh-discovery-search/graphs/contributors)